Create documentation for running non-python (#23989)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/docs-beta/docs/guides/external-systems/non-python.md

---
title: "Running non-Python languages"
sidebar_position: 60
---

> Dagster is written in Python, but that doesn't mean it's limited to running Python to materialize assets. This guide covers how to run some JavaScript with Dagster using Pipes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dagster is written in Python, but that doesn't mean it's limited to running Python to materialize assets. With Pipes, you can run code in other languages and send information back to Dagster. This guide covers how to run JavaScript with Dagster using Pipes, however, the same principle will apply to other languages.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Some prerequisites we can include:

- Creating assets in Dagster
- A basic understanding of JavaScript
- Familiarity with Dagster Pipes

Reviewer 3: > Familiarity with Dagster Pipes

may not be a hard prereq? because this guide basically walks the reader through how pipes work?

# Define your JavaScript function

> Here's a contrived example of some JavaScript code to run using Dagster Pipes. `train_model` load some dataset and train a sequential model using tensorflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will demonstrate running JavaScript code using Dagster Pipes. In this example, the `train_model` function loads a CSV and trains a sequential model using the Tensorflow library.
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: In our Dagster asset we reference this file as:
``` 
command=["node", "../tensorflow/main.js"],
```
Can we include the file header for this code block?

Reviewer: This file should be extracted out to a `.js` file in code_examples. That way it can be auto-formatted.

import * as tf from '@tensorflow/tfjs';

async function train_model(config) {
  const { path_to_data, data_config, path_to_model } = config;
  const dataset = await tf.data.csv(path_to_data, data_config).map(({ xs, ys }) => {
    return {
      xs: tf.tensor2d(Object.values(xs), [Object.values(xs).length, 1]),
      ys: tf.tensor2d(Object.values(ys), [Object.values(ys).length, 1])
    };
  })
  .batch(100);

  const model = tf.sequential()
  model.add(tf.layers.dense({units: 1, inputShape: [1]}));
  model.compile({loss: 'meanSquaredError', optimizer: 'sgd'});

  await model.fitDataset(dataset, {epochs: 250})
  await model.save(path_to_model);
  model.summary();
  return model;
}
```

# Define your asset in Dagster

<CodeExample filePath="guides/automation/pipes-asset.py" language="python" title="Asset using Dagster Pipes." />

Dagster Pipes follows a similar design to Unix pipes, hence the name. The `PipesSubprocessClient` is responsible for running external processes and setting up input/output files. The asset defined here is materialized using the `PipesSubprocessClient` running a Node.js file containing the `train_model` function.

> 

Reviewer 3: i think here at this step, we can invoke the js script already.

one confusion around pipes is that one has to make changes to their external script in order to make pipes work. but in fact, you don't have to.

so i'd suggest adding a section here - something like "Run Typescript from Dagster without code changes"

without external code changes (any js util functions to access pipes), you still get:
- know when the job completed or failed (subprocess will exit 1)
- get stdout/err from node/subprocess to dagster

but you won't get:
- pass vars from dagster to typescript
- stream logs from databricks to dagster

then, the following sections can be wrapped up as an "advanced: pass data between dagster and typescript"

> # Add JavaScript utility functions to access pipes

Reviewer 2: Possible title change, "Accessing Dagster context from our JavaScript code"

The idea of "accessing pipes" may be unclear to those who are new to it. Perhaps we change the title to the above, and briefly mention that this can be used to retrieve data from Dagster, and log events and metadata back.

The `PipesSubprocessClient` calls the child process with two environment variables defined, each containing a path to a file. One for input and one for output.
- DAGSTER_PIPES_CONTEXT: Input context

> - DAGSTER_PIPES_MESSAGES: Output context

Reviewer 2: When implementing pipes, I've had trouble in the past determining the structure of these files contents, for example, the schema of the pipes messages. Would an example snippet help here?

Author: Is there a reference to link to?

    return null;
  }
  // Decode from base64 and unzip
  const decoded = Buffer.from(value, "base64");
  const decompressed = await inflateAsync(decoded);
  // Deserialize to JSON
  return JSON.parse(decompressed.toString("utf-8"));
}

async function getPipesContext() {
  // get the env var value for where the pipes context is stored
  const encodedPipesContextParam = process.env.DAGSTER_PIPES_CONTEXT;
  // decove the value to get the input file path
  const decodedPipesContextParam = await _decodeParam(encodedPipesContextParam);
  if (!decodedPipesContextParam) {
    return null;
  }
  return await fs.readFile(decodedPipesContextParam.path, "utf-8")
    .then((data) => JSON.parse(data));
}

async function setPipesMessages(message) {
  // get the env var value for where the pipes message is stored
  const encodedPipesMessagesParam = process.env.DAGSTER_PIPES_MESSAGES;
  // decode the value to get the output file path
  const decodedPipesMessagesParam = await _decodeParam(encodedPipesMessagesParam);
  if (!decodedPipesMessagesParam) {
    return null;
  }
  const path = decodedPipesMessagesParam.path;
  await fs.appendFile(path, JSON.stringify(message) + "\n");
}
```

> # Create an API for Dagster to invoke

Reviewer 2: Part of my confusion may be the overloaded "API" term, and in the JavaScript world my first thought was HTTP based API, that's my b.

Alternatively we could name this an "entrypoint" for Dagster?

Author: Yeah makes sense, went with "interface with" but could change it to entrypoint if you feel strongly.

> With the utility functions to decode the Dagster Pipes environment variables, a JavaScript function is needed to translate the Dagster Pipes context into a function evocation.

Reviewer 2: I got lost at this part. Would we instead be able to update the existing `train_model` function to use our newly created helper functions? Instead of introducing a `run_operation` function?

```javascript
const ALL_OPERATIONS = {
  train_model
}

async function run_operation() {
  const { asset_keys, extras: { operation_name, config } } = await getPipesContext()
  if (!(operation_name in ALL_OPERATIONS)) {
    setPipesMessages({ error: `Operation ${operation_name} not found` });
    return;
  }
  const operation = ALL_OPERATIONS[operation_name];
  const model = await operation(config);
  await setPipesMessages({

>     method: "report_asset_materialization",

Reviewer: I think this part is very confusing. The structure here is worth describing before introducing it

Author: I tried to summarize what this logic does a bit. If the feedback is that the code is too confusing then I don't think that I'll have enough time to completely rework the example. It took me all day monday and tuesday to get this far.

Reviewer 3: i think we can land the simplest one without this whole util functions, meaning you could stop here: https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/pull/23989#discussion_r1737281472, no context loader or message writer, and call it a day for docathon. i can pick up the later part.

Author: It's okay. I'll just abandon and you can pick it up later. Sorry guys.

Reviewer 2: I think this example is still quite useful!

I'll see if we can combine it with @prha 's guide, but I don't want to lose what you produced here. Thanks @sbquinlan !
